Add Cloud Native AI Scheduling Challenges Whitepaper (#2164)
cncf/toc: initiatives/1641_Cloud_Native_AI_Scheduling_Challenges_Whitepaper/1_Understanding_AI_Workloads_for_Kubernetes_Scheduling.md

## Context

Kubernetes has become the standard platform for deploying containerized applications. Its default scheduler excels at placing stateless microservices: it finds a node with sufficient CPU and memory, starts the pod, and moves on. If a pod fails, the system restarts it. If demand increases, horizontal autoscaling adds more pods. This model works well for web servers, APIs, and similar workloads.

AI workloads break these assumptions. Understanding why requires examining the AI/ML lifecycle in detail.

**Suggested pre-reading:**

If you are new to Kubernetes scheduling, you may find these resources helpful:

* [Kubernetes Scheduler documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/kube-scheduler/)  
* [Pod Priority and Preemption](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption/)  
* [Resource Management for Pods and Containers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/)  
* [Dynamic Resource Allocation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/)

# Understanding AI Workloads

## The AI/ML Lifecycle

> AI and machine learning projects follow a lifecycle with distinct stages. Each stage has different resource requirements and scheduling characteristics.

Reviewer: I would add here a list of bullet points of the sections that are coming below, so the reader know what is coming and how many stages to expect: 
- Data Preparation
- Model Development
- Model Training
- Model Inference
- Emerging Patterns

These can be links to the following sections.

### Data Preparation

Data preparation transforms raw data into a format suitable for model training. This includes:

* Data collection: Gathering data from various sources (databases, APIs, file systems)  
* Data cleaning: Removing duplicates, handling missing values, fixing inconsistencies  
* Data transformation: Normalizing, encoding categorical variables, feature scaling  
* Data splitting: Dividing data into training, validation, and test sets

> From a scheduling perspective, data preparation is typically CPU and I/O intensive rather than GPU-intensive. That said, GPU-accelerated frameworks can significantly speed up large-scale data processing tasks such as filtering, joining, and aggregating datasets. Jobs are often parallelizable—you can clean different partitions of a dataset independently. Event-driven scheduling is common: new data arriving triggers a preparation pipeline.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can also mention unstructured data?

```suggestion
From a scheduling perspective, data preparation is typically CPU and I/O intensive rather than GPU-intensive. That said, GPU-accelerated frameworks can significantly speed up large-scale data processing tasks such as filtering, joining, and aggregating datasets. Additionally, GPUs work well for unstructured data like images because image processing involves massive parallel math operations.

Jobs are often parallelizable—you can clean different partitions of a dataset independently. Event-driven scheduling is common: new data arriving triggers a preparation pipeline.
```

Reviewer 3: This is a great suggestion @andreyvelich

> Kubernetes resources like Jobs and CronJobs handle these workloads reasonably well. Workflow orchestrators (Airflow, Argo Workflows, Flyte) coordinate multi-step pipelines.

Reviewer 2: What about Spark here?

```suggestion
Kubernetes resources like Jobs, CronJobs, and SparkApplications handle these workloads reasonably well. Workflow orchestrators (Airflow, Argo Workflows, Flyte) coordinate multi-step pipelines.
```

Reviewer 4: like is an example. There are many resources we could use.

Reviewer: I kinda agree with mentioning only Jobs and CronJobs as they are part of plain Kubernetes. Can SparkApplications be mentioned later, maybe..

Author: Yes, we wanted to focus on Kubernetes resources here.

### Model Development

Model development has two distinct activities that are often combined:

* **Feature engineering** transforms prepared data into input features the model can use. This involves creating new variables, encoding categorical data, and selecting which features to include. Feature engineering is computationally similar to data preparation—CPU and I/O bound, parallelizable, often triggered by new data.  

> * **Model architecture** involves selecting the type of model (linear regression, decision tree, neural network, transformer) and designing its structure. For deep learning, this means defining layers, attention mechanisms, and other architectural choices. This work is often interactive—a data scientist experimenting in a notebook—and does not require significant compute resources until training begins.

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to add topic around HPO?

```suggestion
* **Model architecture** involves selecting the type of model (linear regression, decision tree, neural network, transformer) and designing its structure. For deep learning, this means defining layers, attention mechanisms, and other architectural choices. This work is often interactive—a data scientist experimenting in a notebook—and does not require significant compute resources until training begins.
* **Hyperparameter tuning** optimizes how the model learns rather than the structure of the model itself. This includes adjusting parameters such as learning rate, batch size, optimizer choice, number of epochs, and dropout rates. Unlike architecture design, hyperparameter tuning is compute-intensive because it requires repeatedly training and evaluating many model variants. These tuning jobs are highly parallelizable and are commonly distributed across GPUs or clusters.
```

Reviewer 3: @andreyvelich please suggest a change for the paragraph below since it is no longer necessarily valid re: heavy resource demands only in the next stage. :)

### Model Training

Model training is the process of exposing a model to data and iteratively adjusting its parameters (weights and biases) so it learns patterns that generalize to new inputs.

Training requirements vary enormously depending on the model:

* Training a linear regression model takes seconds on a laptop  
* Training a random forest might take minutes to hours on a single machine  
* Training a large language model takes weeks to months on thousands of GPUs

For deep learning at scale, training is distributed across multiple machines. Workers communicate using collective operations like all-reduce, which requires all participants to synchronize. This creates the gang scheduling requirement: if you need 64 workers and only 60 are available, the job cannot start. If one worker fails mid-training, the entire job may need to restart from a checkpoint.

Training jobs are:

* Long-running: Days to months for large models  
* Resource-intensive: Hundreds to thousands of GPUs  
* Tightly coupled: All workers must run simultaneously  
* Sensitive to topology: Communication speed depends on GPU interconnects

> The default Kubernetes scheduler cannot handle these requirements. It will start pods as resources become available, potentially leaving a job stuck with partial resources indefinitely.

Reviewer 2: With the efforts around WAS, I wouldn't mention this, maybe we can say:
cc @helayoty @kannon92  @mm4tt

```suggestion
These characteristics require additional Kubernetes scheduler capabilities to support efficient all-or-nothing placement and topology-aware scheduling.
```

Reviewer 4: Yea good call out.

### Model Inference

After training, the model is deployed to make predictions on new data. Inference has two common patterns:

* **Batch inference** processes large datasets offline. For example, running a trained model over satellite imagery for an entire continent, or scoring millions of records for a recommendation system. Batch inference looks like a large parallel job—it can use many GPUs, but individual tasks are independent. Gang scheduling is typically not required.  
* **Real-time inference** responds to individual requests with low latency. A user sends a query; the model returns a prediction in milliseconds. Real-time inference requires:  
  * Models preloaded in GPU memory (loading a model can take longer than serving a request)  
  * Horizontal scaling to handle variable request rates  

>   * Low-latency networking

Reviewer: While Low-latency networking is always relevant, I don't think it is related to scheduling, or is it? I wonder if this was mentioned here, because a future point will make a reference to this.

Author: We have this tied to GPU Direct Communication in following papers, hence it is called out here.

## What Makes AI Workloads Different

Traditional cloud-native applications—web servers, APIs, microservices—share common characteristics that Kubernetes handles well:

* Stateless or easily replicated state  
* Short request/response cycles  
* Horizontal scaling by adding more pods  
* Graceful degradation under load (serve some requests slower, drop others)  
* Pods are fungible; any pod can handle any request

AI workloads break these assumptions:

* **Long-running jobs.** A training run is not a request that completes in milliseconds. It is a job that runs for days or weeks. Interrupting it wastes all the work done since the last checkpoint. The scheduler must account for job duration, not just instantaneous resource needs.  
* **Massive resource consumption.** Training large models requires hundreds or thousands of GPUs running simultaneously. A single job can consume the majority of a cluster's capacity for extended periods. This is not "scale horizontally by adding pods"—it is "reserve a large fraction of the cluster for one workload."  

> * **Tightly coupled distribution.** Distributed training uses collective communication patterns where all workers must participate. You cannot start with 7 of 8 workers and add the 8th later. You cannot lose one worker and continue with the remaining 7\. Either all workers are running, or the job cannot proceed. This is fundamentally different from web services, where losing one replica just shifts load to the others.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Tightly coupled distribution.** Distributed training uses collective communication patterns where all workers must participate. You cannot start with 7 of 8 workers and add the 8th later. You cannot lose one worker and continue with the remaining 7. Either all workers are running, or the job cannot proceed. This is fundamentally different from web services, where losing one replica just shifts load to the others.  
```

  * Checkpointing periodically saves model state to storage, creating bursty write patterns  
  * Model loading for inference transfers large model files from storage to GPU memory before serving can begin  
* **Topology sensitivity.** Performance depends on which specific GPUs are allocated and how they are connected. Two GPUs on the same node with high-speed interconnects can communicate at hundreds of GB/s. Two GPUs on different nodes communicate over the network at 10-100 GB/s. For workloads dominated by communication (like distributed training with frequent synchronization), this difference determines whether a job takes hours or days.  
* **Latency requirements:** Some jobs have high latency tolerances and others, such as inference, have much lower latency tolerances, as there is an end user waiting for an answer

## Resource Characteristics by Lifecycle Stage

The following table summarizes the resource profile of each lifecycle stage:

| Stage | Primary Resources | Duration | Scheduling Characteristics |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |

> | Data Preparation | CPU, storage I/O, network | Minutes to hours | Parallelizable, event-driven, no gang requirement |

Reviewer 2: Actually, gang scheduling is very useful for Spark, it's more about that data processing can tolerate single worker failure. WDYT about this @rajaskakodkar ?

```suggestion
| Data Preparation | CPU, storage I/O, network | Minutes to hours | Parallelizable, event-driven, elastic by nature |
```

Reviewer 3: It's helpful to denote that there is no gang requirement -- could you please rephrase your suggesetion @andreyvelich

Reviewer 2: Could you clarify please @angellk? As I mentioned data processing jobs might also require gang-scheduling requirements to ensure driver and executors have sufficient capacity to run.
The only differences is that such jobs can tolerate executor failures, which is uncommon for training jobs.

This is what I ment by _elastic by nature_

| Feature Engineering | CPU, memory, storage I/O | Minutes to hours | Similar to data preparation |
| Model Development | CPU (notebooks), minimal GPU for experiments | Interactive sessions | Long-running pods, modest resources |
| Training (small models) | 1-8 GPUs | Hours to days | Standard job scheduling |
| Training (large models) | 100s-1000s of GPUs | Days to months | Gang scheduling, topology awareness, checkpointing |

> | Fine-tuning | 1-64 GPUs | Hours to days | Similar to small model training |

Reviewer 2: You can separate it by this.
Usually, fine-tuning has same constraints as pre-training.

```suggestion
| Pre-Training (large models) | 100s-1000s of GPUs | Days to months | Gang scheduling, topology awareness, checkpointing |
| Post-Training (fine-tuning) | 1-64 GPUs | Hours to days | Similar as pre-training |
```

| Batch Inference | Variable GPU count | Hours to days | Parallelizable, throughput-oriented |
| Real-time Inference | GPUs with models preloaded | Continuous | Low latency, autoscaling, model serving |

> The key insight: different stages need different scheduling strategies. A cluster running the full ML lifecycle must handle event-driven pipelines, interactive notebooks, gang-scheduled training, and latency-sensitive inference—often simultaneously, competing for the same GPU resources.

Reviewer: I am not an expert on this topic, but doesn't make sense to have a single cluster for all these tasks? Wouldn't be more practical to have specialized clusters?

Author: I guess that would need specifics on defining architecture of cluster for different stages of AI/ML workload lifecycle, which would be tangential to the focus of this paper.

The scheduling needs for model development are modest. Interactive notebook environments need stable, long-running pods. Feature engineering jobs look like data preparation jobs. The heavy resource demands come in the next stage.

### Model Training

Model training is the process of exposing a model to data and iteratively adjusting its parameters (weights and biases) so it learns patterns that generalize to new inputs.

Training requirements vary enormously depending on the model:

* Training a linear regression model takes seconds on a laptop  
* Training a random forest might take minutes to hours on a single machine  
* Training a large language model takes weeks to months on thousands of GPUs

For deep learning at scale, training is distributed across multiple machines. Workers communicate using collective operations like all-reduce, which requires all participants to synchronize. This creates the gang scheduling requirement: if you need 64 workers and only 60 are available, the job cannot start. If one worker fails mid-training, the entire job may need to restart from a checkpoint.

> 

Reviewer 5: Adds a reference to the NCCL all-reduce documentation for readers unfamiliar with collective communication.

```suggestion
For deep learning at scale, training is distributed across multiple machines. Workers communicate using collective operations like [all-reduce](https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/nccl/user-guide/docs/usage/collectives.html), which requires all participants to synchronize. This creates the gang scheduling requirement: if you need 64 workers and only 60 are available, the job cannot start. If one worker fails mid-training, the entire job may need to restart from a checkpoint.
```

Author: I'd like the source to be vendor agnostic. Since these can be defined based on vendor logic, I'd refrain from linking one doc.

Training jobs are:

* Long-running: Days to months for large models  
* Resource-intensive: Hundreds to thousands of GPUs  
* Tightly coupled: All workers must run simultaneously  
* Sensitive to topology: Communication speed depends on GPU interconnects

> 

Reviewer 2: Moved this comment: https://github.com/cncf/toc/pull/2164/changes#r3266600508

```suggestion

During model training phase, users want to tune hyperparameter to optimize how the model learns rather than the structure of the model itself. This includes adjusting parameters such as learning rate, batch size, optimizer choice, number of epochs, and dropout rates. Unlike architecture design, hyperparameter tuning is compute-intensive because it requires repeatedly training and evaluating many model variants. These OptimizationJobs are highly parallelizable and are commonly distributed across GPUs or clusters.

```
